
# Project 1: Hello, bitshifting!


Goal: Learning the baiscs of writing and compiling/running C, and fundamental
principles of data

**Note:** This first project is going to involve much more reading than usual,
because there are a lot of background concepts that need to be mentioned in
order for this to be mostly self-contained. Try to read it as thoroughly as
possible, and I will attempt to inject tangible exercises to back up the text.
In the future, there will be much more doing and not as much reading.

## Phase 0. Prologue:

I can't really assume absolutely zero exposure to programming without this
series being twice as long, but we'll try to start with the most digestible
steps possible. I'll assume that you at least know roughly what datatypes
are, what functions are, and how they receive and return data at a basic
conceptual level. I will still give a short crash course to C syntax, though.

C is written like pretty much any other imperative (lines of code are executed
one after another) programming language. It posseses:

### Fundamental types

The fundamental types typically used in C are `char`, `int`, `float`, and
`double`. The first two types are integers (whole numbers, e.g. 3, -1, 12), and
the last two types are floating point decimals (real numbers, e.g. 2.143,
0.000003, 3.1415926). The distinction between `char` and `int` or `float` and
`double` are how much memory each takes up; later on we will take a deep dive
into what this actually means when it comes to programming.

### Variables

```c
int a = 3;
```

Where `int` tells the compiler what type of data the variable holds, `a` is any
alphanumeric name for the variable (which can also include `_` but cannot start
with a number), and `3` is the value assigned to the variable.

### Arithmetic

```c
int a = 3;
int b = 2;

int c;  // declaring 'c' without giving it a value
c = a + b;  // c is now 5
c = a * b;  // c is now 6
c = a / b;  // c is now 1 (note: integer division)
c = a % b;  // c is now 1 (modulo operator)
```

With integers, `a / b` represents integer division, i.e. long division.
3 divided by 2 is 1 (3 goes into 2 once) with a remainder of 1. `a % b` performs
the same division but returns the remainder instead of the quotient.

We also have versions of the arithmetic operators which compact a special
statement:

```c
int a = a + 5;  // Add 5 to a

// Can be equivalently written:

int a += 5;
```

The same thing exists for `-=`, `*=`, `/=`, and so on.

### Boolean logic

```c
int a = 1;
int b = 3;
int c;

if (a < b)
{
    c = 0;
}
else if (a == b)
{
    c = 1;
}
else  // a isn't < b or == b, so it must be > b
{
    c = 2;
}

// c will be 0 since a (1) is less than b (3), so the first "if" block was taken

```

Note that to test for equality, double equals (`==`) is used. Single `=` is
for assignment (i.e. changing the value of the left side), and double `==` is
used to test if the left and right side have the same value.

Integers themselves can be interpreted as boolean values (C does not possess a
pure `bool` type). They can also be used with boolean operators `||` (or), `&&`
(and), and `!` (not)

```c
int a = 0;
int b = 1;
int c;

if (!a)  // "if not a, "
{
    c = 5;
    // In this case, a is 0, so !a is 1, and 1 means "true", so c is set to 5
}

if (b || a)  // "if b or a"
{
    c = 6;
    // c is now overwritten with 6 since b || a (1 || 0) evaluates to "true"
}

```

### Functions

```c
int add(int a, int b)
{
    return a + b;
}
```
This function (which we arbitrarily named `add`) takes two integers, `a` and
`b`, and returns an `int`, in this case their sum.

Functions return values like in any other language:
```c
int a = 3;
int b = 2;

int c = add(a, b);  // c == 5
int d = add(5, 1);  // d == 6
```

`void` returns:

This function takes an integer and has a `void` return (i.e. it returns
nothing):
```c
void print_value(int c)
{
    printf("Here's my int: %d", c);
}
```

Don't worry about the `printf()` function yet, it just prints out
its argument; we needed something for the function to do that doesn't depend
on returning a value, and this is the simplest example.

### Arrays

Like any other language, collections of data can be stored in arrays, which are
fixed-length, fixed-order lists of data:
```c
int my_array[5];  // Creates an uninitialized array of 5 integers

my_array[0] = 1;  // Array indices start at 0
my_array[1] = 2;
my_array[2] = 3;
my_array[3] = 4;
my_array[4] = 5;
```

We can loop over this array with a **for loop**:
```c
for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++)
{
    my_array[i] += 2;
}

// my_array now contains {3, 4, 5, 6, 7}
```
`i++` is shorthand for `i = i + 1` or `i += 1`.

Another type of loop, the **while loop** behaves like an "if" statement
that repeats as long as the argument remains true:
```c
int i = 0;
int a = 0;
int k = 10;
while (i < k)
{
    a += 1;
    i++;
}

// a is now 10
```

## Phase I. Hello World!

Here is the canonical starting point of setting up any new language. I will
provide the code in full. Type it (do not copy and paste) into a new file:

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void)
{
    printf("Hello, world!\n");
    return 0;
}

```

`#include <stdio.h>` is a **preprocessor directive** which essentially tell
the compiler "Hey, before you go about compiling this code, there are some
things that this program contains that we haven't defined ourselves. In this
case, `printf()` is an external function (we haven't defined it here, nor is
it a fundamental, primitive feature of C like arithmetic), which is defined
in the file `stdio.h` (**st**an**d**ard **I/O**).

Our `main()` function takes no arguments (`void`) and returns an `int`. This return
value typically represents whether or not the program worked correctly;
returning 0 indicates that everything went fine, returning anything else means
there was some sort of error. We return 0 because if we made it to the end of
our `main()` function, nothing catastrophic happened (the program didn't stop
or die halfway through).

Save your file under the name `hello.c` in the Project1 folder. While in the
same folder, type the following commands:

```bash
you@computer:~/Path/to/Project1$ gcc hello.c
```

The current directory should now contain a file called `a.out`, which is the
output of the compiler, your compiled executable. Type:

```bash
you@computer:~/Path/to/Project1$ ./a.out
```

to run the program. You should be greeted by the message:

```bash
you@computer:~/Path/to/Project1$ ./a.out
Hello, world!
you@computer:~/Path/to/Project1$ 
```

If so, everything worked! If not, google is your best friend. Any errors
encountered this early as surely incredibly common with anyone starting to
learn C so answers should be readily available online.

## Phase II. Strings are arrays

- Write a string and then index its elements like an array

Now that we have a functional basis for writing code, we'll focus on an
application of the basic features of C.

Strings (strings of letter, i.e. text) are a common object to work with in most
languages, and C is no exception. In C, however, the interaction with strings
is lower level than in most languages.

Strings are fundamentally represented by arrays of characters, which seems
logical enough. We can represent the phrase "Hello, world!" as a list that
contains its constituent characters:

```
{'H', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', ' ', 'w', 'o', 'r', 'l', 'd', '!', '\0'}
```

Note the last character in the list, `\0`. This is the "null" character,
which is simply a byte representing the number 0, `00000000`. This character
is how the computer knows it has hit the end of the string, and we say that
strings in C are **null terminated**.

Now it's time to take a very significant detour and talk about binary
representations of data. It may seem heavy handed and advanced, and some
would argue that it's too early to dive into, but it provides a fundamental
understanding of what the computer is doing that is extremely powerful when
it comes to learning the more confusing aspects of programming like pointers
(next project).

### Interlude: Binary and Hex

Before I begin, I *strongly* suggest playing around with a programming
calculator while reading this section. A good programming calculator will
allow you to convert values between decimal, hexadecimal, and binary, and
will allow you to inspect the bit patterns that represent the values.
They are very useful when dealing with binary data in programming and
will help you understand the following concepts much more easily.

My favorite is the free android application "BitCalculator," or if you have
a Windows computer, the built-in Windows calculator has a "programming" mode
with almost as much functionality. Equivalents can be found for other
operating systems as well.

Now let's return to our friends `int` and `char`.

`char` is often used to represent ASCII characters, which are defined to be 
represented by 1 byte (8 bits). I suggest looking up an ASCII table online,
to see for yourself. For example, the lowercase letter 'a' is represented by
the ASCII value 97. Therefore, `char` is really just equivalent to a 1-byte
integer, with a maximum value of 2<sup>8</sup> or 255 (plus 0, for a total of
256). It behaves like a character when we interpret it as such, but
fundamentally it's just a number.

`int` is also just an integer number, and almost always takes up 4-bytes, for
a maximum value of 2<sup>32</sup> or 429496725.
Note that these max values are for **unsigned** integers, meaning they run from
0 to their maximum value. `int`s are signed by default, meaning their maximum
value is halved, because the most significant place is used as a sign bit. A
signed `int`, for instance, goes from -2147483647 to +2147483647.

To make sense of all this, I'm about to start writing values in binary and
hexadecimal.

Ordinary "decimal" (deci-: 10) values are stored as powers of 10:

6219 = 6&#215;10<sup>3</sup> + 2&#215;10<sup>2</sup> + 1&#215;10<sup>1</sup> +
9&#215;10<sup>0</sup>

Similarly, binary values (base 2) are stored as powers of 2:

152 = 1&#215;2<sup>7</sup> + 0&#215;2<sup>6</sup> + 0&#215;2<sup>5</sup> +
1&#215;2<sup>4</sup>  + 1&#215;2<sup>3</sup>  + 0&#215;2<sup>2</sup> +
0&#215;2<sup>1</sup>  + 0&#215;2<sup>0</sup>

So in binary we'd write it as 10011000. Not the most compact or intuitive way
for us to write numbers (since it takes many more digits and we are used to
having 10 fingers), but computers are built with binary switches so our
entire system hinges on binary representations.

Hexadecimal (base 16) is a conveient way to handle binary that is also not as
intuitive to use as base 10, but is far more compact. Instead of 10 digits, hex
has 16, so the digits become:

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D E F

and just like in decimal, where you increment the next place when you run out of
digits in the previous place, we count in hexadecimal like this:

0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, F, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 1A, 1B, 1C, 1D, 1E, 1F, 20, 21, (...) 98, 99, 9A, 9B, 9C, 9D, 9E, 9F,
A0, A1, (...) F9, FA, FB, FC, FD, FE, FF, 100, 101 ... and so on.

Note that any number less than 10 is identical to the decimal representation.

Here are some common hexadecimal numbers and their decimal equivalents:

| hex | decimal |
|-----|---------|
| 0   | 0       |
| 1   | 1       |
| A   | 10      |
| F   | 15      |
| 10  | 16      |
| 100 | 256     |
| 1000| 4096    |

Here's why hexadecimal is so incredibly useful:

One hex digit (0-F) can count from 0 to 15, representing a total of 16 values.
In binary, `1111` is 15 (`F` in hex), and 16 (10 in hex) is `0001 0000`.
`0010 0000` is 32 (20 in hex). Look at how these values line up:

```
hex:    0 F
bin: 0000 1111

hex:    1 0
bin: 0001 0000

hex:    2 0
bin: 0010 0000
```

This is why I separate bytes into two groups of four: each group of four bits
is represented by one hex digit, which is a very handy correspondance. For
example, if I see the hexadecimal value 0xA04F3CC1 (`0x` is simply a prefix
which means that it's a hex number), I can immediately know that the binary
representation is:

```
0x    A    0    4    F    3    C    C    1
bx 1010 0000 0100 1111 0011 1100 1100 0001
```

Unlike decimal, you can look at a hex number and know exactly what each chunk
of 4 bits contains, without having to do any more math than knowing how to
count to 15 in binary. You also immediately know how many bytes it takes to
store the number, since two hex digits (e.g. `A0`, `4F`, `3C`, `C1`) represents
one byte.

So if we want 32 bits of all 1s, we can just write `0xFFFFFFFF`, and know that
each group of 4 bits will be `1111`, and there are 8 digits, which corresponds
to 4 bytes.

If we want 64 bits of all zeroes, but want the most significant byte to be
all 1s, we can write `0xFF 00 00 00 00 00 00 00` (when you write hex values
in code you can't separate them, but I've done it here to make the individual
bytes more obvious).

So returning to our datatypes, here are a few examples of `char`s and `int`s:

```
char a = 0;  // 0000 0000 = 0x0
char b = 1;  // 0000 0001 = 0x1
char c = 2;  // 0000 0010 = 0x2
char d = 3;  // 0000 0011 = 0x3
char e = 16; // 0001 0000 = 0x10
char f = 226;// 1110 0010 = 0xE2

int g = 1000; // 0000 0000  0000 0000  0000 0011  1110 1000
      // hex = 0x   0    0     0    0     0    2     E    8 = 0x2E8
```

Note that the `char`s are one byte long (guaranteed by definition), and in this
case the `int` is 4 bytes long (32 bit; not guaranteed, but often the case).

Floating point values also have binary representations, but they're more obtuse
and not particularly relevant to using them.

### Back to strings

So now let's apply this information about binary to our understanding of
strings. Let's consider the following string:

```c
char my_str[] = "Hi mom";
```

When we used `printf()` earlier, we just wrote `"Hello, world!"` without
considering what that object was. When you write text in quotes like that,
it's called a **string literal**. When we actually want to store a string
in a variable, however, we need a more concrete definition. Therefore, we
use `char my_str[]`, an array (`[]`) of `char`, which we have chosen to call
`my_str`. We don't define how large the array is, because we're initializing
it with the string literal immediately; therefore, the compiler can figure
out how long it should be.

In this case, "Hi mom" contains 6 characters (including the space), plus the
hidden `'\0'` character mentioned before (to denote the end of the string),
so our `my_str[]` array will be 7 elements long. We could have also chosen to
initialize the string like this:

```c
char my_str[] = {'H', 'i', ' ', 'm', 'o', 'm', '\0'};
``` 
which is identical to the "string literal" method. Note the explicit `'\0'`
character, though.

We can access the elements of the array like usual:
```c
my_str[3] = 'b';
my_str[5] = 'b';
```
and now the 'm's have been exchanged for 'b's and the string says "Hi bob".

We can take this a step further and look at how the string is represented
directly in memory. Let's print out all the values:

```c
for (int i = 0; i < 7; i++)
{
    printf("%.2x ", my_str[i]);
}
```
Where `%.2x` is a format specifier which tells `printf()` how to interpret
the bytes in `my_str[i]`; in this case `.2` means write a minimum of 2 places
and `x` means to print the values in hex. Read the `printf()` reference online
for more details. The output is as follows:

```
48 69 20 62 6f 62 00
```

Which correspond to:
```
'H'   'i'   ' '   'b'   'o'   'b'   '\0'
48    69    20    62    6F    62    00
```

Memory is fundamentally just a huge array of bytes, so if we were to peer
into the RAM and observe the bytes that store this data, we would see:

| hex | bin       |
|-----|-----------|
| 48  | 0011 0000 |
| 69  | 0100 0101 |
| 20  | 0001 0100 |
| 62  | 0011 1110 |
| 6F  | 0011 1111 |
| 62  | 0011 0010 |
| 00  | 0000 0000 |

And those bits are stored by transistors in the RAM, so we see how physical
circuits actually store the string we're using.

Since the characters are fundamentally integers, we can do arithmetic on them:

```c
my_str[4] /= 2;
```
This takes the 4th character, `'o'`, which has (decimal) ASCII value 111, and
performs integer division by 2. The result will be 55, which is the character
`'7'`. So the resulting string will be `"Hi, b7b".

## Phase III. Bit shifts

This all seems somewhat arbitrary, so now let's learn how to make use of it.
In order to do so, we'll have to learn the remaining operators in C:

Shifts:

* `<<` - "left shift", shifts bits to the left
* `>>` - "right shift", shifts bits to the right

Shifting a value has the following effect:
```
0001 << 1 = 0010
0010 << 1 = 0100
0100 << 1 = 1000
1000 << 1 = 0000

0001 << 3 = 1000

1011 0101 0110 1010 << 5 = 1010 1101 0100 0000
```

As you can see, shifting bits literally simply takes each bit and moves it
some number of places to the left. Shifting to the right works in the same
way.

Bitwise logic:

* `|` - "bitwise or", performs a logical 'or' operation on each bit
* `&` - "bitwise and", performs a logical 'and' on each bit
* `^` - "bitwise xor", performs a logical 'xor' on each bit

For example:

```
0001 | 0100 = 0101

Or more clearly written as

    0001
    0100
  ------
    0101
```
The `|` operation looks at each corresponding bit of the two values, and
performs a logical "or" to decide the value of each bit. We can also transpose
the above into a truth table, as an alternative representation:

| a | b || a\|b |
|---|---|-|-----|
| 0 | 0 || 0   |
| 0 | 1 || 1   |
| 0 | 0 || 0   |
| 1 | 0 || 1   |


We now have a toolset that allows us to do some very powerful things. Here is
an example:
Let's say we want to write an assembler, which is the program that takes
assembly instruction and turns them into machine code. Let's say we have an
instruction:

```asm
add $t1 $t0 $t2
```
The instruction is an R-Type RISC-V instruction which will be translated into
machine code by the following table:

| funct7  | rs2 | rs1 | funct3 | rd | opcode |
|---------|-----|-----|--------|----|--------|
| 0000000 | rs2 | rs1 | 000    | rd | 0110011|

In this example, rs1 (source register 1) is `$t0`, rs2 (source register 2) is
`$t2`, and rd (destination register) `$t1`. According to the RISC-V
specification, `t0` is register #5, `t1` is #6, and `t2` is #7. Therefore we can
fill in the table using those values, like so:

| funct7  | rs2   | rs1   | funct3 | rd    | opcode  |
|---------|-------|-------|--------|-------|---------|
| 0000000 | 00111 | 00101 | 000    | 00110 | 0110011 |

so our entire translated instruction is 
```
00000000011100101000001100110011
```
(let's take a moment to appreciate how handy assembly is, by comparison).

Now let's return to the world of C. We've seen that the smallest piece of data
we can stick in a variable is one byte, but in this case we have pieces of data,
such as the register numbers, are less than a byte (in this case, only 5 bits).

Luckily, we now have a tool that will allow us to interact with sub-byte data,
which I will demonstrate with an example, by extracting the value of `rd` via
"bit masking."

We begin with our instruction, which is a raw chunk of 32 bits (4 bytes).
```
00000000011100101000001100110011
```

Let's store this in a C variable, which I will initialize with the hex value
`0x728333` (exactly the same as our binary instruction). Note that I store it
with a datatype of `uint32_t`, which is just an integer type from the `stdint.h`
library which is guaranteed to be unsigned (hence the `u`) and exactly 32 bits
(remember that the size of regular `int`s are not guaranteed):

```c
uint32_t instruction = 0x728333;
uint32_t mask = 0x0;
```

I also created a variable of the same type, called `mask`, and gave it the value
zero (in hex, which doesn't change anything but makes it clearer that we're
treating these variables as raw bits). Let's look at these two pieces of data
side by side:

```
00000000011100101000001100110011    instruction
00000000000000000000000000000000    mask
```

We're looking for the value of `rd`, which is 5 bits long. Observe the following
steps:

```
uint32_t instruction = 0x728333;
uint32_t mask = 0x0;

mask = 0x1F;
```
I've set the first 5 bits of `mask` to all 1s:

```
00000000011100101000001100110011    instruction
00000000000000000000000000011111    mask
```

Recall the property of hex that 1F maps to binary like this:

```
   1    F
0001 1111
```

which is how I chose the value 1F to fill the first 5 bits.

We want our mask to be aligned with the `rd` bits, which are bits 7-11, so we
will shift our mask left by 7 bits:

```
uint32_t instruction = 0x728333;
uint32_t mask = 0x0;

mask = 0x1F << 7;
```

The mask now looks like this:

```
00000000011100101000001100110011    instruction
00000000000000000000111110000000    mask
```

It's now lined up with the `rd` bits. We can capture the value of these bits by
using a bitwise "and":

```
uint32_t instruction = 0x728333;
uint32_t mask = 0x0;

mask = 0x1F << 7;

uint32_t result = instruction & mask;
```

which looks like this:

```
00000000011100101000001100110011    instruction
00000000000000000000111110000000    mask

00000000000000000000001100000000    result

or separated to make it clearer what's going on:

                    | rd  |
00000000011100101000 00110 0110011    instruction
00000000000000000000 11111 0000000    mask

00000000000000000000 00110 0000000    result
```

The `1`s in the mask will transmit any matching `1`s in the instruction to
`result`, while blocking any part of the instruction not in the mask bits. We've
successfully extracted the `rd` bits from the instruction! They are still in the
original position from the 32 bit instruction though, in its current state the
value of `result` is 1536, so we'll shift it back so that the 5 `rd` bits begin
at the start of `result`. We shifted the mask left by 7 to reach the `rd` bits,
so we can just shift `result` right by 7 to get it back to the start:

```
uint32_t instruction = 0x728333;
uint32_t mask = 0x0;

mask = 0x1F << 7;

uint32_t result = (instruction & mask) >> 7;
uint32_t rd = result >> 7;
```
Which gives the result:
```
00000000011100101000001100110011    instruction
00000000000000000000111110000000    mask

00000000000000000000001100000000    result
00000000000000000000000000000110    rd
```

`rd` now contains the value `0110` (discarding most of the leading bits for
readability), which is the decimal valid `6`. Hooray! Our original destination
register, `$t1`, is register #6!


#### Getting your hands dirty

Now that you've followed that rather labored example, let's actually put our
hands on real binary data in C.
