At this point, I've laid a hasty but relatively broad introduction to basic
programming in C with some subtle references to the architecture of the
underlying computer itself. Now it's time to learn how to interface with
the computer in a far more tangible and useful way.

File I/O (input/output) is a fairly basic but powerful way to interact directly
with the operating system, because it allows a program to store data that lasts
longer than the program itself. This could be a settings file or other config,
an image, or data specific to that program's job, like LibreOffice saving a
.odt file, GIMP saving a .xcf file, and so on (you can tell I like open source
software). You could write your own image editing software or text editor,
and save the data in whatever custom format you like.

However, the world works better when people agree how to save data. In a later
project, we will build a .BMP (bitmap) image reader/writer which will be very
exciting, but takes a while due to the complexity of the format specification
which defines how to save the data in the file. It's simple compared to other
file formats, and once you get the hang of it it's straightforwards, but on the
first time it will take some wrestling to get working straight.

Once it works, however, you will have opened the doors to write any software
that does anything related to image files. You can write a raytracer, do image
recognition, draw graphs, generate cool patterns with cellular automata, and so
on. The options are exciting and it's a fantastic experience to have written
such software from the ground up, but it will take practice to get to that
point.

This time we're going to start with a "toy" example, but that doesn't mean it
will be easy, nor is it useless: the exact same principles apply to writing any
other file, including images and audio files.


TODO: Think of what sort of files to actually make...


The critical aspect of writing data to files is that it has to be done in a way
that is the same every time. Computers have different hardware and handle data
differently, so we have to take care to remove these artifacts [struct packing]

