Project 3

There are many, many tutorials out there on writing basic data structures, and
queues are no exception. Because of this, I am not going to give the most
thorough tutorial, but I'm still including this for the sake of completeness.

Queues work just like a queue at a grocery store, hence their name, which also
serves as a useful example.
Let's say you have a program that describes people in a queue at a store,
waiting to check out. Perhaps we are writing a "cashier simulator" game for
training new employees. In order to store the information about the people in
line, we can use a queue data structure.

The idea is simple: when the first person enters the back of the queue, they
also become the person in the front of the queue. When the second person joins,
they wait behind the first person, and are the last in line. More people join
the queue, lining up behind the last person in line and becoming the new last
person in line until someone else joins behind them.

Meanwhile, the person in the front of the queue checks out, and leaves. The
person behind them then becomes the new "front" of the line, and so on.

The data structure is implemented in the exact same way.

We define "nodes" which represent arbitrary data objects which store only two
things: a piece of data, and the "node" ahead of them (i.e. nearer to the front
of the queue). Here is a node: [pic]

They can then logically be chained together like so: [pic]

We then create an object that represents the queue as a whole,
which stores a pointer commonly called "HEAD," or "FRONT." This pointer acts
as a handle for the first node in the queue, and the rest of the nodes are
tracked by the chain depicted in (fig n.).

In order to use the queue, the object posseses an interface that describes how
to interact with it. A function allows us to "push" data onto the back of the
queue, and another allows us to "pop" objects from the front (this is the
standard lingo to describe these actions). Here are pictures describing the
action conceptually: [pic]

Note that the nodes are actually invisible to the user, the "push" and "pop"
functions allow the user to deal with data alone, without having to worry
about the mechanism that keeps track of them. That's the beauty of abstraction.

I have provided an interface as a guide for what sort of functions should be
available to the user, as well as an example test case to test your code.

Now go implement it. Follow the picture schematics as a guide.
