Project 7

Threading is a powerful concept that is often not discussed until high octane,
upper division computer science courses like the infamous "Operating Systems."
It changes the way you have to think about code execution and becomes difficult
to debug, but it's a powerful enough tool that I believe it should be taught as
soon as possible, and that moment has come.

The confusing thing about threading is that code execution no longer becomes
sequential and deterministic. The threads of code are handed to the operating
system to distribute however necessary. The operating system can and will spread
the threads out to separate physical cores of the CPU, switch between them,
and force them to yield to other programs on the computer.

This actually happens with any program, but the difference is that with a normal
program, there is only one path of execution, and when it's interrupted, it
picks up right where it left off. With threading, this unpredictable behavior
can occur with any of the parallel threads of execution at any time,
changing their speed relative to the others, which may result in the program
behaving in different ways from run to run. This is called a "race condition,"
when the outcome of a program depends on which thread gets to a certain place
faster than the other.

This leads to problems when it comes to managing how threads communicate or
work on shared data, and that's when the advanced upper division courses come
in: this stuff gets *ugly*. Like, **really** ugly. Writing threaded software
is a nightmare born in hell that has lead to the literal deaths of people. Look
up the "Therac-25," a cancer radiation therapy machine which zapped several
people to death with high energy electron beams due to a parallel programming
error.

To avoid having to spend a month of me lecturing you directly on some of the
ways to combat these issues in general, and to save you from pulling your hair
out, we'll save the more advanced cases for a later time. For now, we will
work with what are called **embarrassingly parallel** tasks, ones which are
very easy to distribute to multiple threads. The graphics computations computed
on a GPU are an example of such a task.
