
As if OOP and C++ wasn't a big enough jump, we have a whole bunch of even more
significant features of C++ that make it an extremely powerful language. The
downside is that things start getting complicated quickly.

Let's say you want to write a "vector" class which can represent n-tuples of
numbers, such as a 3D vector representing a position, velocity or force, or
perhaps a more abstract vector representing color (R, G, B), etc.

We might write such a class like this, which represents 3D vector of floats:

```cpp
class Vector
{
private:
    float x;
    float y;
    float z;
public:
    Vector() : x(0.0f), y(0.0f), z(0.0f) {}
    Vector(float x, float y, float z);
    Vector add(Vector &other);
    float dotProduct(Vector &other);
    // ... and so on, more vector math
};
```

This is all fine and dandy, but say you are writing another program that
operates on a fixed grid. Floats won't really work anymore, for a variety of
math reasons [note: why]. We could simply copy and paste our entire class and
all of its function implementations, but this is not very "DRY" ("don't repeat
yourself"). If you discover a bug in your vector class, you now have to fix it
in multiple places (more fun vocabulary: this is called "shotgun surgery"), and
it also just bloats the number of lines of code in your program.

We have a powerful solution to this problem: templates.

Classes are already sort of like "templates" for objects, which define some
structure which can then store unique values as members upon instantiation.
The templates we're about to talk about are an entirely new level of
generalization: they describe a template for a class or function that will be
filled in at compile time to produce entirely different versions of the code.

Let's investigate a simple example:

```cpp
template <typename T>
class Vector
{
private:
    T x;
    T y;
    T z;
public:
    Vector(T x, T y, T z);
    // ... other accessor functions
};
```

Here we've preceeded our class definition with the statement `template
<typename T>` which indicates that for the following declaration, define a
generic type `T` to be filled in later. We then instantiate our class like so:

```cpp
Vector<float> v(0.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f);
Vector<int> u(1, 3, 2);
```

We write `Vector<float>` to indicate that we are going to use a version of the
vector class which uses floats wherever we wrote a `T`. The compiler essentially
copies the declaration of our class, replaces every instance of `T` with
`float`, and then compiles as usual. The result is that `Vector<float>` and
`Vector<int>` are actually two entirely distinct classes; you can't have an
array of `Vector[]` and fill it with either variety.

We can push this concept even further:

```cpp
template <typename T, int S>
class Vector
{
private:
    T components[S];
public:
    Vector();
    // ... other accessor functions
};
```

We've added a new parameter to our template: `int S`. Instead of a type, it
receives an integer, which is then used to define how many components the
vector stores. We can instantiate our vector:

```cpp
Vector<float, 3> v();
```

I've left out the constructor arguments for the sake of example; there are ways
to generalize them, but they're beyond the scope of this lesson. [look up x if
interested]

When we write this, the compiler creates an instance of our class that looks
like this (for T=float and S=3):

```cpp
class Vector
{
private:
    float components[3];
public:
    Vector();
    // .. other accessor functions
};
```

There is a particular advantage to this methods over other ways of generalizing
classes. We could easily have made `components` a pointer to a dynamic array
of floats. However, this would require much more effort to ensure proper
management of the dynamic memory, and allocating dynamic memory has a slight
performance overhead (the computer has to go find a vacant spot in memory each
time). Accessing the components through the pointer also adds an extra step in
memory access. By making the size of our member array a compile-time constant,
the component data is all stored directly inside the Vector object, making it
more efficient.


C++11 and forward has completely changed the way people write performant code,
and templates are only one of many examples of this. C++ has developed large
amounts of powerful tools that allow the programmer to write code more easily
without any cost to run-time performance. The `auto` keyword is a good example:
it allows the programmer to not care about the type of a piece of data and let
the computer figure it out, like in Python.

```cpp
auto a = 3;
auto b = 5;
auto c = a + b;

std::cout << "C is: " << c << std::endl;
```

It is fundamentally different than python though: in C++, although the types are
unspecified in the code, the compiler performs type deduction and still does
hard static type enforcement. This gives you the freedom to be carefree about
types or even write type-independent code, but the compiler will still strictly
enforce strong typing and will complain if there are mismatches. It won't let
you feed an "employee" class into a calculator function and then explode when
the objects don't interact properly. You get the best of both worlds.
