
This lesson contains a lot of information because the subject matter has deep
and far-reaching ramifications. I'll try to summarize them as briefly as
possible but it will still be somewhat dense. Hopefully later examples will
clarify things somewhat.

There's a pattern that you've no doubt seen many times by this point:

```c

struct MyStruct
{
    int a;
    int b;
};

void add_to_mystruct(struct MyStruct *s, int c)
{
    s->a += c;
    s->b += c;
}

```

where a function essentially only exists to abstract away the direct interaction
with the members of the "object" represented by an instance of a struct.

The queue was a good example of this; it had functions that allowed the user
to push or pop data to and from the queue, without having to copy and paste
a nasty chunk of code every time to describe exactly how this should be done.

Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) is a paradigm that serves to condense this
pattern into a more intuitive bundle: it allows structures to possess "member
functions," which have automatic access to the member variables.

Sticking with the same example as before, instead of writing

```c
struct MyStruct my_st;
add_to_mystruct(my_st, 4);
```

We simply write

```cpp
my_st.add(4);
```
This has immediate and obvious benefits. It's far more intuitive to more
strongly couple the interaction to the object itself, more readable, and keeps
your code much cleaner. C++, a language originally derived from C, posseses
native support for Object Oriented Programming in this way.

In C++, we introduce "classes," which are essentially structs designed for
object oriented programming. Just like a struct, a class defines a sort of
"template" which is used to make it easier to package related data together
into one unit, with the addition of member functions:

```cpp

class MyClass
{
private:
    int a;
    int b;
public:
    MyClass(int a, int b);
    void add(int c);
};

```

There are a few things to unpack here, which will be elaborated upon later:

* `private:` keyword - This keyword means that any member variables or functions
which are declared afterwards are private to the class. Only the class's member
functions can access them. This would not have made sense without member
functions as all functions are external to structs in C, but this distinction
has arisen how that member functions and classes are a coupled unit.

* `public:` keyword - This is the opposite of the private keyword, and simply
means tha the subsequently declared functions or members are accessible from
the outside, just like the members of C structs usually are.

These labels tell us which members should
be visible from inside and outside the class; since functions associated with
classes are a part of the classes themselves, we can allow some data to be only
accessible by the class's member functions.

* `MyClass(int a, int b)` - There is this strange public function which has the
exact same name as the class. This is the **constructor**, which is a function
that can store logic that is automatically run when the class is instanced.




Structs still exist in C++, and behave roughly the same way as C structs.
The only real difference is that structs' members are public by default, whereas
class members are private by default. However, by convention structs are usually
used to represent "POD" (plain-old-data) types, without member functions or
fancy internal logic. A good example would be a "point" class that stores only
a pair of coordinates and nothing else:

```cpp
struct Point
{
    float x;
    float y;
};
```
